---
title: Philips Philetta
abstract: Produced since the 1940s, the Philips Philetta arguably constitutes Philips most iconic radio.
authors:
 - caroline-resch
date: 2023-11-03 
---
**Catalogue entry: The Philips Philetta 213**
---
You would like to retrace the life and journey of one of Philip’s most iconic radios? Well, let me introduce myself: I am the cult classic Philips Philetta. The B2D13A from 1961, boasting an ivory-colored case to be precise. This is not just about me though. I intend to highlight the whole life story of us Philettas, produced since the 1940s.
I am popular. I am successful. I am venerated. I am legendary. I am iconic. I was all these things at least. Now I am old. I am outdated. I am replaced. People do not need radios like me anymore. Entertainment takes place in other places now. But back then, I and my series would rule the segment, being compact and very affordable. My owners really loved me. I am so ingeniously designed, not only when it comes to my looks but also my functions. With the live content I received, I used to be their gateway to the world.
What do I look like you might ask? I am compact, stiffly rectangular yet harmoniously rounded. My body is made of plastic, colored ivory but I also come in brown, beige, or gold Bakelite, or made of wood. Dark recessed strips are painted around the front panel. My speakers are covered by a gold-tinted perforated metal grid, which is covered again by a transparent bulky plastic grid painted in gold that makes me look like the radiator grill of an American car. At the top center of the grid, you can find a Philips logo. Underneath this large grid sits a one-piece plastic dial showing a number of radio stations. Left and right of this dial are two cream or brass-colored plastic knobs which are trimmed in brass. The right one tunes AM or FM, while the left one regulates the volume and the tone control. At the bottom of this dial sits a button set consisting of five cream-colored buttons. With these buttons, my 4 bands can be changed, and I can be turned on or off. Underneath these buttons, you can find my name, majestically spelled out in caps. Arguably, the most special thing about me is the indirect partial lighting of my front panel. Two pilot lamps were edge-mounted at the bottom of my dial. This not only lights up the dial but also casts a soft glow over the transparent plastic grid. You should look at me. I am so pretty, so elegant and chic, especially when the room is dimly lit. My soft glow will enchant you. Many say it makes me look sacred. I have even provided quite some romantic moments to my owners…I’ll have to tell you more about that later. In all I weigh 3,7 kg and measure 28,5 x 18 x 16,5 cm.
Our looks have changed significantly over time though, making it difficult to say what model is the classical Philetta. I guess I should tell you more about my ancestors so that you can understand why I am so special. My ancestors were first born in 1941, when engineers of the Dutch company Philips designed a 4-tube/ 6-Krs-Super which became the first Philetta model, also called the Philetta 203U. This model was specifically meant for export. Back then Philips was the first to introduce the vacuum tube (“Schlüsselröhren” in German) which allowed the design of a smaller radio, therefore also known as a travel radio. The looks of it were quite simple. It resembled a rectangular box with rounded edges. The context of its production, namely the Second World War explains why the 203U was produced with very simplistic and cheap material. More precious material was reserved for war productions. Subsequently, due to its looks and especially the dark brown compound case, the radio received the depreciating nickname of “Kommisbrot”. Either way, the groundwork for a successful series, including me, was laid. Due to its compact size, German soldiers would bring the radio to Germany when bringing the radio with them on campaigns, that’s how it also got the nickname of “Soldatenradio”. The Philetta was such an innovation that the German regime decided to build its own, including manufacturers such as Mende, Loewe or Horny that copied us. After the Second World War, Philips took on production again and was produced in Germany for the first time, in Wetzlar to be exact. They not only adjusted the design but also lowered the prices.[1] In my humble opinion, the design was also not as ingenious as mine… U-tubes had to be employed instead of the “Schlüsselröhren”, because those could not yet be produced again. The stick-on glass panel they put on top of it tended to fall out and break when people would clean so that really is a weakness. But in all fairness, it did already light up, just like mine, although mine looks way more intricate. Over the course of the following years, the designs were significantly adjusted again and again. Between 1949 and 1954 the design of the Philetta changed almost yearly. While the Philetta from 1950 did already boast a grid and two knobs left and right, making it resemble a car’s chassis, just like me, the next models looked very different. With the Philetta 54V brought on the market in 1954, Philips started to really consolidate the looks and style of the Philetta. This design would remain consistent for almost a decade, which is quite rare, to be honest. In 1959 next to the universal current there was also an alternating current (AC/DC) edition with E-tubes produced. Although Philips also introduced the first transistor Philetta in 1961, I was still run by tubes.[2]
To me, I am clearly the model that emerged to be the classic and the centerpiece of the series. I mean, have you looked at me? My design is unmistakable and unique. A true classic. Other brands thought so too, so they continued to copy the Philetta, like the Grundig 85, the AEG 3054WU, or the Telefunken Gevotte 55. Anyway, where was I? Ah yes, me being the most famous Philetta-style. Although I was a little pricier than my predecessors, costing 219 DM, that did not really constitute any issues considering the economic boom of the 50s and 60s allowed more people to afford a radio like me. I mean, I was great for everyone. I was built compactly thanks to high-quality small band filters (“Miniaturbandfilter”) specifically manufactured for me. This made me the perfect second radio for any home. I was known to be a beginner-level radio and was not only bought by young families, such as my owners, but also as a gift for confirmations for instance. I was even very common in hospitals and hotels. I loved to enchant people with my sounds, high-quality technology, and pretty lights. My receivers are so sensitive and selective that I could receive anything. Since I could also run in different networks, I was also liked by sailors and nicknamed “Seemannsradio”.[3] Have you ever seen a radio as practical and versatile as me? I doubt it.
Enough of my predecessors. After all, this is about me, the iconic Philetta 213. As I’ve said I was the perfect second radio, be it for travel or to be placed in the kitchen. My lovely owners also had me in the kitchen. I loved this place. It is where all the interaction happened, where everybody would gather throughout the day. I was in the middle of the action and really felt like a part of this family. I loved listening to Pit and Lotty’s stories from work but also of little Hubert’s school day. But what I loved more than listening was playing. It is what I knew best. Being designed with the utmost care and genius, I use 5 tubes (ECC85, ECH81, EF89, EABC80, EL95), and 4 bands, namely UKW, SW (shortwave), MW (standard broadcast), and LW (longwave). My circuit is superhet. You can even connect external FM and AM antennas, an external speaker, or a phonograph turntable on my back. I also have an AC/DC set that can be used with 220-volt as well as 127-volt AC current. I can receive many different programs from all over Europe and the world. My owners loved that about me.
Even when the television arrived, I still had a foothold, because I had so much more content to offer. I did not only entertain them, but I also kept them informed of what was happening in the world. I truly was their key to the world. Especially because I transmitted live content. The concept of live is what really defines me as a radio. Liveness is therefore incredibly important and vital to me. After being employed as a professional notion referring to the technologies allowing to “be live”, liveness has become an academic concept central to media and television studies since the 1950s.[4] Liveness provided my owners with a sense of immediacy; a natural and direct link to any given event happening in their country or the big world is provided through live broadcasts played by me. My owners always talked about how magical it is to listen to something that is happening right now. It made them feel like they were there and like they were a part of it. Although I have to admit, not everything I transmitted was actually taking place in the moment. Some broadcasts were recorded in advance but labeled as live. But you know what? That did not really matter to them as long as they had the illusion that it is live. Broadcasters did a good job in managing sounds in order to create an effect of liveness. In that way “liveness is a construction, which producers work at to offer genuine experiences that viewers feel they are witnesses of”.[5] As scholar Paddy Scannell put it, liveness is thus about lived experience and being alive.[6] The sounds I transmitted were dynamic and fleeting. My owners needed to listen very carefully because what I played was transitory. So, while liveness provides immediate content it also provides something perishable. Hubert always loved to listen to bike races. When he listened to the Tour de France, he felt like he was there, like he rode with them. The broadcaster of course played an important role of making sure of that.[7] He not only needed to describe what was happening but also the surroundings and the atmosphere. A real closeness to the event was invoked when Hubert listened. In comparison to the television, he did not see, which is great because the orality encouraged his imagination. Moreover, knowing that this content is listened to by so many others, an aural “imagined community” was created through liveness.[8]
Oh, the fun we used to have together. I used to be so central to their daily life. Especially Hubert was always so amazed by me. When he was little, he used to push and turn on my buttons. You should have seen me in my glory. With my soft glow, I used to enchant the kitchen. My owners adored the atmosphere I created, especially when dawn began to break. Pit and Lotty loved to turn me on when they had one of their romantic dinner nights. My yellowish lights would give the impression of candlelight, perfectly fitting the occasion. With my variety of available programs, they would also always find a sweet tune to play and even slow dance to.
I love to reminisce about those times. Thanks to my durability, we spent almost 20 years together. But all good things come to an end at some point. Even though the Philetta series is the longest-built series of a European manufacturer, my personal technology became outdated. Transistor radio took over in 1967 when the last tube radio was released. Transistor technology allowed the production of smaller and more portable devices, such as the Philetta 22RB292 from 1970, which significantly shrunk in size and therefore also changed in design. Additionally, television gained a hand making me more and more redundant. Eventually, I was retired. Now my resting place is in the attic, where I’m collecting dust and waiting for a restoration.
My legacy lives on, however. Not only do I think I’m iconic, Philips and the consumers think so too. In October 2012, my brand Philips continued the Philetta series with a highly modern alternative inspired by the 255 from 1955, mainly meant to please collectors.[9]
 
 


[1] Die Philetta Rundfunkgerätserie, eine Legende der Funkgeschichte, Arbeitsgruppe Sammlung Technikgeschichte im NDR, NDR, p. 3.
[2] Ibid., p. 3-5.
[3] Ibid, p. 4.
[4] Karin Van Es, The Future of Live (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2017), loc. 155.
 
[5] Ibid., loc. 381.
[6] Paddy Scannell, Television and the Meaning of “Live”: An Enquiry into the Human Situation. (N.p.: Polity, 2014), p. 103.
[7] Es, Karin van, and Judith Keilbach, ‘Keeping Up the Live: Recorded Television as Live Experience’, 7.13 (2018), 60, p. 5. See: Scannell, Television, p. 99.
[8] Michele Hilmes, Radio Voices: American Broadcasting, 1922-1952. (U of Minnesota Press, 1997)
[9] ‘Philetta der 50er Jahre ist zurück: Philips präsentiert das Original Radio’, Philips, URL: https://www.philips.de/a-w/about/news/archive/standard/news/consumerlifestyle/20120828_Philips_praesentiert_das_OriginalRadio.html  [accessed 20 June 2023]
